General notes and outline

1. Data tables
2. simple metric calculations 
3. multimetric calculations 

Data examples and assignments. 
AMD data as in class example -- maybe just animas?
Las Animas data for assignment

Animas
2 main analyses
pairwise comparisons
longitudinal 

Pairwise (ref, impact):
A68, A72
A73EC, A73
A75CC, A75D

Longitudinal
A55, A60, A68 | A72, A73, A75D

Need to get data in order
  sheet 1 = upstream reference site A55
  sheet 2 = taxonomy
  sheet 3 = all other data
    A60, A68, A72, A73, A73EC, A75D, A75CC

2. simple metrics - Richness
generic - count of EPT, families, etc. 
Shannon diversity - higherer values = more diversity
Heptageniidae richness
Ephemerellidae Richness
Taeniopterygidae
Orthocladiinae
EPT
Taxa

Other simple metrics from biotype 1
non-insect percentage (abundance / total abundance)
number of clinger taxa
percent EPT no Baetidae

3. take metrics from MMI
Plug into specific 


proposed outline, just animas data
Show data in class
read in first "sheet" which has data from one site
read in second sheet which has taxa information
join data
calculate simple metrics
  total taxa richness
  Ephemeroptera richness
  Family richness
  % ephemeroptera
  Number of clinger taxa
  
third sheet has info for all sites
Read that in, bind_rows with first sheet, then join
Group data by site and repeat calcs above
Plot results 
  filter to show paired sites; add "ref" and "impaired"
  filter to show longitudinal sites, and plot in order

Assignment 1) calculate all simple metrics

Lecture - CO's MMI
data day - calculate some of the metrics and plug into MMI equations
Show averages or site specific MMI calculations, but only using coupld of MMIs calculated above

Assignment 2) calculate MMI metrics for all indices. Calculate averages

## Scope, ABT
Community data is complex and multifaceted. A list of species becomes a list of orders, FFGs, presence/absence, abundance, proportions, etc. We can perform these analyses in Excel (examples) but it is prone to errors and can be tedious. Therefore, we are going to learn statistical and data analysis software to make our jobs easier in the long run. Learning this language has a steep learning curve, but it is an extremely useful skill that is worth your time to learn. Every minute spent learning this can save you many minutes, if not hours, in the future. Be kind to your future selves and spend time learning this now. 